Title: Introduction
Date: 2015-02-16 00:00:00
Category: General

Hello and thank you for taking a look at my new blog! Chances are that you are wondering who I am and why you should care. My name is Tobias Macey and I am a polyglot software and systems engineer. I work as a Senior DevOps engineer, as well as running [a small software consultancy](http://www.boundlessnotions.com) on the side. As to why you should care, I intend to serve as a resource for how to effectively work in and manage the intersection of Dev, Ops and Data.

You may very well be wondering what I mean by that. In the current landscape of software development there is an explosion of technologies to contend with and it becomes increasingly necessary to understand how to not only write usable software, but also how to deploy and maintain it. Increasingly, the systems that we build are generating massive amounts of data which leads to unavoidable problems of how to manage that stream and what to do with it. This is applicable to the data generated by users of our software as well as the systems on which that software runs. I hope to provide some insight into various approaches for managing the combinatorial explosion of complexity that all of these new concerns confer upon our projects.

I welcome you to join me on my journey through the crazy, ever-shifting labyrinth that is the technology industry. Questions and criticism are always welcome, so feel free to contact me through any of the channels listed at the bottom of the page or in the comments.

Thank you for reading and come back soon!
